You're invited to a real English conversation with me and my husband Dan.
We're gonna be talking about education today.
You asked us your top education questions in English
and we're going to have a chat about those questions
and mercy you in English and I hope you will end up on the other side of this conversation
with a higher level of vocabulary.
More confidence about speaking in English and you'll enjoy it along the way.
And like always, I've created a free PDF worksheet which is over Dan's face at the moment
with all of today's important vocabulary, definitions, sample sentences,
everything that you're going to hear in the lesson you will get in the free PDF worksheet.
So you can click on the link in the description to download that free PDF worksheet today.
All right Dan, are you ready to get started with the first question that our students have asked us?
I'm ready to get educated.
All right, let's do it. These education questions were asked by my student,
Carmen from Italy and Maiji in Australia. Are you ready for the first one?
I'm ready. All right, the first question is what age does school start in the US?
That's where we're from, the US. And what does the education system look like?
So let's start with the first question. What age does school start in the US?
Yeah, so a lot of kids go to some kind of school around four years old.
So this would be preschool. And in a lot of cases, this is not provided by the state.
Yeah, this is something that parents have to pay for out of pocket.
Mm-hmm. And I would say this is like kind of like daycare except maybe a little more education
peppered in because they're really little kids. Yeah. And then official school is kindergarten
which starts around five or six years old. Yeah. And this is where real school begins.
We're sitting and trying to learn our letters and alphabet reading. And here's numbers and all that kind of thing.
Yeah. And then elementary school would be first through fifth grade. Yeah, first through fifth grade.
Which is probably what seven to eleven or twelve. Yeah. Yeah. Something like that.
And here's old. Yep. And then it moves on to middle school, which is everybody's favorite time of
existence 12 to 14. This is like straight example of sarcasm. Oh, yes, this is sarcasm.
Yeah, middle school. Not known for being the most fun time. And no, it's funny because a lot of
kids are like moving at this time. Like they're going in. They could be going to a different school
different classes. Yeah. And then you're going through the awkward time in your life.
Yeah. Here's some other new people for you. It'll be fun. So yeah, that's an interesting time.
Usually middle school has the stereotype of being pretty rough. Pretty tricky. And then after middle school is
high school. And by that point, you're what like 14 years old. You're a real man. Like 14 through 18 years old.
So you're not right. The beginning, the cusp of puberty instead, you're a little further in.
And maybe a little more mature. Maybe ninth grade is still at awkward. The ninth grade is still
because you're, you know, when you're in ninth grade and you're like 14 or 15. And then you see like a 17 or 18 year old.
A lot of the, especially if you're a guy like me, puberty can hit all the sudden. And then you'll be a man
versus like I was a boy. A little boy when you're ninth grade. Oh, guys.
Yeah. So this is the typical progression of school. And there's a couple different options in the
US. You could go to public school, which is free. It's paid for by your taxes. So if you pay taxes,
it's technically not free. Free not free. Yeah. So free not free. It's paid for by the state.
You go to public school. You could go to a public charter school. So this is kind of a nuance where
you don't have to pay extra to go to a charter school. But it's somehow, it's run privately.
It's run privately. It's smaller. Usually the programs have a little bit higher quality. And to get into a
charter school, you often need to do a lottery. And this isn't like the lottery where you try to win a million dollars.
This is where you just sign up and they pull a kid's name out of a hat. Totally random. And if you get it,
you get it. And if you don't, you don't. So it's not based on your income. It's not based on where you live.
Because most private or most public schools are based on where you live. You have to go to the school
in your neighborhood. Yeah. But a charter school. Yeah, especially if you live in an area that's really poor.
Well, your school is probably not going to be very high quality. And there's a lot of controversy
about that because it's kind of a cycle. Yeah, it's definitely a cycle. You don't have as many resources
to get out of poverty and all of that. So we've got public school, charter school, private school.
I have a little statistic here. I looked up at advanced fancy private schools. 9% of students
go to a private school and parents have to pay extra for a private school. It could be a religious
private school. It could be a secular private school. Our child Theo. He's probably in the one
percent because he goes to a nature school. It's not really a point five percent. It's a very unusual
private school. But there's also other types of private schools. Like in nature school where
half of the day they spend time outside in the woods or the teachers try to incorporate
the outside nature into the lessons. A lot of times these schools will call themselves alternative
education. So that just means we're trying to do something different here. Yeah. And there's
varying degrees of quality. Just because you're paying for it doesn't mean that it's going to be
vastly better quality than the free public school. So if you come to the US and you think I want my
kid to have the best education, I think I can afford to pay for private school. Make sure you check it
out first and make sure that it's actually the quality that you want. There are a lot of scholarships
actually. So the school that our son goes to, a lot of people have an 80% scholarship to go to the
school, which makes it very affordable. The state has scholarships. The school provides some scholarships.
There's some grants given to the school to provide scholarships. So they're trying to make it more
accessible. Yeah. Most schools, especially private schools and anything education related,
you're going to find a lot of organizations that will try to help kids get into whatever they really
really want. And the government helps with that as well. Yeah. America. I think a lot of it comes
down to the parents having the ability to sign up, follow through with the applications, sign up for the
scholarship. It doesn't mean it's easy. It doesn't mean it's easy, but it is an option. There's a
fourth option, which is what Dan experienced when he was a child. Home schooling. Look at me. So
interestingly enough, what percent of Americans do you think homeschool? This means that generally
don't peak your mom or what I learned in homeschool. Your mom or your dad is your teacher. Usually
your mom. And there's like local organizations that you can join weekly, like a co-op. They call it a homeschooling
co-op. What percent of American children are homeschooling as of 2021? Well, I would have guessed
it was very low. See, I think I looked at your phone earlier and saw it. Well, you showed it to me,
but I would have guessed like 2%. Okay. Before seeing that. Okay. But I think it's higher. Yes,
the answer is 7%. Which is pretty high? It's almost the same amount as go to private school.
Yeah, that's crazy. Yeah, so 7% and the interesting thing. I guess it probably bumped up after
COVID too. Yes, that's the big thing. So before COVID it was, I think, 4% or 5%. And now it's 7%.
And it's growing 10% every year. So it's hard to talk about those stats. And it's growing every
year because of all the changes in education. Yeah. And our public schools gotten kind of like a
bad reputation as well. I mean, there's varying qualities, but a lot of people where they live,
their school is not very good. And it's not just teachers. It's also like the pears you're with.
And it's kind of, I don't know. I mean, obviously I teach at an alternative school. So I don't,
I'm not a big fan of the traditional model. And I don't like all the bureaucracy and not to say that
there's not a lot of good-hearted people in the system. I just think that the system is well,
it's in my sound a little cliche, but it's broken. Yeah. So those are the general options in
the US. And I think the cool thing is that if you choose an alternative option, private school, charter
school, homeschooling, it's not seen as very weird. It's unusual. It's not the majority,
but you're not like at outcast. You're not so weird. Oh my goodness, you homeschool. It's not like that,
generally. It's just, okay, someone does something different. I think that's kind of like in the American
culture. That is a very much an American culture thing. Yeah, you accept people try to accept people who do
different things. And because we lived in South Korea for a while, like we felt that difference so big,
like we never met anybody who homeschooled there. We met like one family. Yeah. Like wow,
this is amazing. Yeah, like everyone uses the same education system and deviating from that norm is
really unusual. Yeah, or even looked down on. But in America, if you do something different like that,
people, they may like sometimes go and like whisper about it or like say, I don't really agree with that,
but they'll never tell you to your face. Yeah. That they have a problem with that just like a decision
you might make, especially in a personal decision. Dan was homeschooled until how old? Yes, until
13. I think yes, until middle school. And that's pretty cool. Yes. And I feel like homeschooling
today is way better than it was when I was a kid. Way more resources. I think that what I
experienced, I don't want for my kids, but today I can kind of feasibly see how you can build up certain
social exposures, have certain groups. There's a ton of resources online. Yeah. And your mom certainly
did the best that she did. Oh yeah, my mom did a good job. I think it was just for me personally.
I don't think it fit what I probably needed as a child. Looking back. I needed more pressure
July. I needed a deadline. I needed another authority other than my mom. And I needed better like a
bigger social circle. And a little more structured education. I thought I would think would have been
good for me. Not that my mom wasn't somewhat structured, but it's just a different kind of thing.
Yeah, homeschooling in the 90s compared to homeschooling now 30 years later. That's crazy. All right,
let's go on to question number two. Do most American students go to universities after their graduation?
Is it considered important? Let's talk about like our general feel first and then I've got some
stats about how many people actually go. I haven't looked at the stats this time. I didn't make
it that far. Let's hear what's inside your heart, Dan. So I think, yes, people generally go to
we would say college, but I think a lot of the world would say university. I don't know the percentage,
but I would say what's your guess? What's your guess? It's a good talk. 80th. No, 75 percent.
Wow, really. Yeah. Okay. What is it? Okay. No, no, no, no, no, no. It's 92 percent, 61 percent.
I think this is showing your bias because I don't know which way the bias is. Let's say that
so for us, we have a four-year degree and that's what you call it when you go to a college for four years.
You could have a two-year degree. It's called an associate's degree or a four-year degree.
And we have four-year degrees. And I think there's been some studies that show like,
if you have a four-year degree, most of the people in your social circle also have the same
or close to the same level of education. Yeah. Everybody I know is edging McKay.
So that's why you think it's so high. Yeah. I should have thought about that. Okay. So in
let's compare 1990 to 19 or to 2021. Okay. In 1990, the people who graduated high school
were 77 percent. So 70 percent of students graduated from high school and 20 percent
of people graduated from college. Okay. 2021-91 percent of people graduated from high school.
So much higher percentage rate and 38 percent of people graduated from high school. Yeah. So it is
higher. And all of the charts that I saw were all going up. So finishing high school and college
are definitely on the rise, not 70 percent would ever be said. But it probably is 70 percent of the
people we know, which I think is quite interesting. And that's kind of part of the cycle of education.
I think that if you don't know anyone who's been to college, it probably won't be a priority for you.
And it will be harder for you to go because you won't have people who know how that process works
and all of that. But if you've been to college, like us, it will be easier for our kids to do
that process because we've been. Yes. I'm glad I could be instructive of a fallacy. You know,
but my personal experience. Well, thanks for being willing to be the fallacy in front of millions of
people. Yes. You're welcome, everybody. But this is also a part two of the question. Is it considered
important? Oh, well, again, this probably goes to your social circle because in my social circle,
it was super important. And I think this is probably family by family. I would say it's almost
expected if your parents are college graduates. It's almost expected. Of course, you're going to college.
However, I think I have heard from certain like our neighbor. I think she said she was the first to go to
college. And like it was like looked upon as like great, but it wasn't like expected. And
but as a society, it is definitely encouraged. Like, you know, there's ads playing on the TV and
YouTube and every teacher will tell you going to college. I'm just going to say university because more
people say they're going to university is going to be a great benefit to your life and all this kind
of stuff. So I think that is definitely pushed in society. That probably is another reason why I think
that a lot of people go. But I'm also forgetting about how expensive it is. Yeah, that's the other thing
is that it's really expensive. I would say anywhere between 30,000 and $200,000 for a four-year degree
depending on if you go to a community college or if you go to a state school or if you go to a private
school, it can range anywhere in there. And that's a big burden for a young person starting off in their
career to have to pay. The state schools aren't cheap or free. They're not cheap and they're not free.
Okay, they're cheaper than private schools. Yeah. It's a very complicated system, but I think I'm a
little ignorant in this realm because I haven't thought about college in a while, but you know,
we went to a small private school and like that's known for being like pretty expensive. Yeah,
yeah, but for me, I had to get a lot of scholarships to go to that school. So I like applied for
tons of scholarships. The school also had scholarships and it was pretty much required. If I was
going to go to that school, I had to have a lot of money already paid for. Otherwise, it was just
too expensive. But I think it's interesting because of our experience, we felt if I can speak for you
too, we felt pretty burdened even though we had scholarships, we felt pretty burdened post college to pay back
or student loans. When you start off your life, your adult life in debt, that's so hard. In my
parents tried so hard. They paid a lot of money. I had a lot of scholarships and I still had college
debt that I had to pay back. So even though I think I was probably starting off in the best possible
position, it still felt like a burden. So I think for us, at least for our children, I have no idea what the
education scene will look like in another 15 years. But I think that we might have a different perspective
on college because we've been there. We know what it's like. We know if it helped us or not in our
life and how expensive it is and if it's worth it. Like are there other alternatives? Yeah, and in our changing
world, those might be better. I don't know. I think it's a cliche among people our age that college
is not worth it. Yeah. And that it's just way too expensive for what you get out of it and it doesn't
really prepare you and all this stuff. I think if you graduated like 2005 to 2010, around that,
maybe even 15 in that range, you probably feel like us that your degree does not mean you will get
a good paint job. It's not a given that that will happen. Yeah. I think initially when we went to
college, there was like a transitional phase where everything was getting, it was getting a lot more expensive
and that cost benefit analysis was maybe making less sense. But a lot of our families were still
saying the same message that you just have to go even if you're not even sure what you want to do,
which was in my case, which I think didn't help me. Yeah. Well, my job didn't even exist when I
went to college. Yeah. This job teaching English online was not even an option. So yeah. It's tricky.
Yeah. And I don't know exactly what the future, I don't know what the future holds. But I
feel like the world changes really, really fast in that I will certainly not tell my children they
have to go to college. And that like this will make all the difference. I'll be like, well what exactly
do you want to do? Let's get in that program. Let's look at the cost benefit analysis of how
much it costs and like really dig in there. Unfortunately, I don't feel like my parents did that.
But their generation really was the last generation who said, I'll get a university degree,
and that will give me a good job and it worked. So their expectation was what happened to them.
But that's not how it is now. Anyway, who knows what will happen in the next 10 to 15 years for
our kids, but I certainly won't pressure them. And I won't feel disappointed if they decide not to go
to college as long as they are independent adults, you know, trying to do something different. And
I'm going to transition to the last question and skip one question. I'm actually because it's
a, I think you're about to say something about it. Oh, I'm going to guess. Because it has to do with
what happens if you don't get a college degree? Is it hard to find a job if you don't have
a university degree? Um, I did a little bit of research about this, but what's your gut say?
If you don't get a university degree, is it harder to get a job? Yeah. Yeah. Like if you didn't have
a degree right now, would your prospects be more difficult? It probably is. I don't think it has to be,
but I do think that I don't know if I've actually read a study about this, but I think I heard in a podcast
that that is like something that employers will look at and they'll be like, "All right, check off for
four-year degree, like they'll just kind of assume that that means a lot." So I do think it does
mean something, unfortunately, I don't think it has to be. I think that you can probably
really get well-educated without it. Definitely. Nowadays, and I think that might even be
preferable when you consider how much it costs. So other than like, there's a lot of social
experiences, however a lot of the social experiences are like getting really drunk and misbehaving.
Yeah, that doesn't really have anything to do with the stupid type. The stupid type of American
college is that you just go there, get drunk, sleep with a lot of people, and then maybe you stumble
into class once a week. Yeah, it doesn't really make any sense. And then you pay lots of money for that.
That wasn't my college experience, but that is certainly- Oh, it was there. It would certainly
what happens to a lot of people. Right. So yeah, but I'm still saying that it does, unfortunately,
probably still matter. Yeah, I would say that that's probably the case for specific careers.
So what I saw was like, you know, of course, if you're going to be a doctor, if you're going to be an
engineer, if you're going to be like in the medical field, you're those very specific technical type of
jobs that require education. That education is probably necessary. But for other careers,
what I read online said is a college degree necessary. Yes, and no. The yes was if you want to be in
those specific career fields. Yeah, if you're going to be a nurse, go get a degree in nursing, and you'll be
fine. I think it's actually even a two-year degree. Yeah, that's amazing. That's not preferable to me like
some kind of two-year program. I feel like you can learn, maybe not anything, but a lot of things
in two years. But it didn't have to be four years. But it said, if you want a job that usually says,
we require a degree, or they highly recommend a degree in their application, maybe like a software
engineer or something like this, if you are an assertive person who has done a lot of alternative
experiences, now this takes a specific personality type, I think. God, I had something for that
resume. Yes, you have a good resume. You've interned. You have maybe taken some extra curricular classes
at the local college, or maybe even some online courses about that specific field. It doesn't have to be
a lot of alternatives out there. Yeah, that you can buy your assertiveness, which is really what people are
looking for often. People who will see a problem and fix the problem. The skills can really be taught,
but that personality and character quality can't be taught as much. So if you show that,
then you could get in. So for example, this isn't about a job. This is about getting into college.
There was a homeschooler who had been homeschooled their entire life, and they wanted to get into a
huge university. I don't think it was Harvard, but it was like a really high level university.
And what they did instead, they wrote out, of course, every charity they worked with,
every volunteer experience, all of this, but they also wrote a list. The second page of their application
was 100 books that I read last year. Holy cow, that's like two books a week. They wrote out
everything that they had read. And in order and all of this, and it showed their assertiveness,
I'm going to be a good student. I'm going to be dedicated. And I think for a lot of jobs,
if you can be outstanding like that, then who cares if you have a degree? Ideally. A little example
too is someone who works for me. Laura, Hi, Laura. If you're watching, she helps to write some of the
sales content, like sales emails. She's called a copywriter. When I interviewed her,
I don't even know if she has a college degree. I don't even know her official education,
but her application process, her experience, and she had taken the initiative to do some
online copywriting classes, and had been working on and off for some other businesses doing their
writing as well. So she had this kind of initiative. And that's really what I was looking for,
was someone who was organized, took the initiative, creative, and was interested in the job.
They had taken some classes of her own volition and really done it. And that's why I hired her.
Yeah. And she's been amazing. Actually, a lot of my students who join my courses, they say that their
job didn't require them to take English classes, but they write on their resume, completed
three-month English course with Vanessa. And this is like the urine institution. It's not
a four-year degree. It's not in Isle Certificate. Something official like that, but it shows that
you took the initiative. I think she's pretty official. And it showed that you're willing to go the
extra mile and to try to do your best. So I think that's a good example of a way that's extra
curricular education can enhance your career as well. Well, talking about internships, I'm curious
in your country. Is it common to do an internship? I think in Germany, it's maybe required
that you do a year internship after high school. And it's like part of this system. I'm not sure if
you're from Germany, let me know. That sounds like a better system to me. I don't know if that's
real real world experience in the world. Yeah. Doing something. But I feel like for me that would have
been pretty helpful just to kind of get out of the education system. I felt very overwhelmed going
from high school to four years of college. And then I had had part-time jobs working in restaurants and
these types of things. But nothing like a career. And by my third year of college, I just felt like,
I just want to go out into the real world and try to get a job. I don't want to do something.
Yeah, I want to do something. And it's not common in the US to take a gap here. This is a common
thing. I think in Europe and Australia that after high school students will take a gap year.
And go out and do something. Good job, Europe. Go be a nanny. Go volunteer at a farm.
Yeah, I think when we were in South East Asia, do something. When we were in France that one year,
we did meet some younger people who seem to either be taking a gap here or do some kind of
intern thing. I don't know. I like that a lot. In the US, it's kind of strange that you graduate
high school. And you have this big ceremony. And congratulations, you get to move on to more
school. Yeah, I pretty much guarantee that if you were in the US and you graduated from high school,
and you said, I'm going to take a gap year. And then I'll decide what I want to do. Every single
person will say, if you don't go to college now, you're never going to do it. This is your chance to do it now,
because you'll forget about it or you won't have the motivation to do it or you'll forget about
education and forget about math, these types of things. But in reality, if you're not meant to
go to college and you wait a year and you decide not to go to college, well, maybe that was a better path for you.
I don't know. I feel a little biased because I saw people doing that Europeans who were doing that
gap year and I felt really jealous. I would have loved to do that. But it's just not an American
culture. Maybe it might start becoming part of it as we kind of learn more about Europe or like
10 years behind Europe in those things. But right now, it's not part of American culture.
You just do school, possibly more school. Or stop school. Pay back your school with your job.
So that's it. All right. Well, thanks for talking to me today about education. You're welcome.
I appreciate it. Thank you all for asking us your great questions. Let us know in the comments
if having an internship or doing a gap year is common in your country. I would love to learn more
about that. And don't forget to download the free PDF worksheet, which includes all of the great
vocabulary that you saw pop up on the screen here that we use. You can get that vocabulary,
definition, sample sentences. And at the bottom of that free worksheet, you can answer Vanessa's
challenge question so that you never forget what you've learned. You can click on the link in the
description to download that free PDF worksheet today. Well, thanks so much Dan for joining me today
to talk about education. You're welcome. It was fun. I hope you're a little bit smarter.
Yeah. And thank you so much for learning English with me. I'll see you again next Friday for a
new lesson here on my YouTube channel. Bye. But wait, do you want more? I recommend watching this
video next where you will see another real English conversation between Dan and I about parenting
hour one two three children. I can't wait to help you immerse yourself in English more and I'll see you
There!